README.md, before:

# Skewer

[![main](https://github.com/skupperproject/skewer/actions/workflows/main.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/skupperproject/skewer/actions/workflows/main.yaml)

A library for documenting and testing Skupper examples

A `skewer.yaml` file describes the steps and commands to achieve an
objective using Skupper.  Skewer takes the `skewer.yaml` file as input
and produces two outputs: a `README.md` file and a test routine.

## An example example

[Example `skewer.yaml` file](test-example/skewer.yaml)

[Example `README.md` output](test-example/README.md)

## Setting up Skewer for your own example

**Note:** This is how you set things up from scratch.  You can also
use the [Skupper example template][template] as a starting point.

[template]: https://github.com/skupperproject/skupper-example-template

Make sure you have git-subrepo installed:

    dnf install git-subrepo

Add the Skewer code as a subrepo in your example project:

    cd project-dir/
    git subrepo clone https://github.com/skupperproject/skewer subrepos/skewer

Symlink the Skewer library into your `python` directory:

    mkdir -p python
    ln -s ../subrepos/skewer/python/skewer python/skewer

Symlink the `plano` command into the root of your project.  Symlink
the standard `config/.planofile` as `.planofile` in the root as well:

    ln -s subrepos/skewer/plano
    ln -s subrepos/skewer/config/.planofile

<!-- This sucks.  GitHub Actions doesn't support workflow files as symlinks. -->

<!-- Symlink the standard GitHub Actions workflow file: -->

<!--     mkdir -p .github/workflows -->
<!--     ln -s ../../subrepos/skewer/config/.github/workflows/main.yaml .github/workflows/main.yaml -->

<!-- So I have a convenience for copying the latest version into place. -->

Use the `plano update-workflow` command to copy the latest GitHub
Actions workflow file into your project:

    ./plano update-workflow

Use your editor to create a `skewer.yaml` file in the root of your
project:

    emacs skewer.yaml

Run the `./plano` command to see the available commands:

~~~ console
$ ./plano
usage: plano [--verbose] [--quiet] [--debug] [-h] [-f FILE] {generate,render,run,run-external,demo,test,update-workflow} ...

Run commands defined as Python functions

options:
  --verbose             Print detailed logging to the console
  --quiet               Print no logging to the console
  --debug               Print debugging output to the console
  -h, --help            Show this help message and exit
  -f FILE, --file FILE  Load commands from FILE (default 'Planofile' or '.planofile')

commands:
  {generate,render,run,run-external,demo,test,update-workflow}
    generate            Generate README.md from the data in skewer.yaml
    render              Render README.html from the data in skewer.yaml
    run                 Run the example steps using Minikube
    run-external        Run the example steps against external clusters
    demo                Run the example steps and pause before cleaning up
    test                Test README generation and run the steps on Minikube
    update-workflow     Update the GitHub Actions workflow file
~~~

## Updating a Skewer subrepo inside your example project

Use `git subrepo pull`:

    git subrepo pull --force subrepos/skewer

Some older versions of git-subrepo won't complete a force pull.  If
that happens, you can simply blow away your changes and get the latest
Skewer, using these commands:

    git subrepo clean subrepos/skewer
    git rm -rf subrepos/skewer/
    git commit -am "Temporarily remove the previous version of Skewer"
    git subrepo clone https://github.com/skupperproject/skewer subrepos/skewer

## Skewer YAML

The top level:

~~~ yaml
title:              # Your example's title (required)
subtitle:           # Your chosen subtitle (required)
github_actions_url: # The URL of your workflow (optional)
overview:           # Text introducing your example (optional)
prerequisites:      # Text describing prerequisites (optional, has default text)
sites:              # A map of named sites (see below)
steps:              # A list of steps (see below)
summary:            # Text to summarize what the user did (optional)
next_steps:         # Text linking to more examples (optional, has default text)
~~~

A **site**:

~~~ yaml
<site-name>:
  kubeconfig: <kubeconfig-file>  # (required)
  namespace: <namespace-name>    # (required)
~~~

A tilde (~) in the kubeconfig file path is replaced with a temporary
working directory during testing.

Example sites:

~~~ yaml
sites:
  east:
    kubeconfig: ~/.kube/config-east
    namespace: east
  west:
    kubeconfig: ~/.kube/config-west
    namespace: west
~~~

A **step**:

~~~ yaml
- title:            # The step title (required)
  preamble:         # Text before the commands (optional)
  commands:         # Named groups of commands.  See below.
  postamble:        # Text after the commands (optional)
~~~

An example step:

~~~ yaml
steps:
  - title: Expose the frontend service
    preamble: |
      We have established connectivity between the two namespaces and
      made the backend in `east` available to the frontend in `west`.
      Before we can test the application, we need external access to
      the frontend.

      Use `kubectl expose` with `--type LoadBalancer` to open network
      access to the frontend service.  Use `kubectl get services` to
      check for the service and its external IP address.
    commands:
      east: <list-of-commands>
      west: <list-of-commands>
~~~

Or you can use a named step from the library of standard steps:

~~~ yaml
- standard: configure_separate_console_sessions
~~~

The standard steps are defined in
[python/skewer.yaml](python/skewer.yaml).

You can override the `title`, `preamble`, `commands`, or `postamble`
field of a standard step by adding the field in addition to
`standard`:

~~~ yaml
- standard: cleaning_up
  commands:
    east:
     - run: skupper delete
     - run: kubectl delete deployment/database
    west:
     - run: skupper delete
~~~

The initial steps are usually standard ones.  There are also some
standard steps at the end.  You may be able to use something like
this:

~~~ yaml
steps:
  - standard: configure_separate_console_sessions
  - standard: access_your_clusters
  - standard: set_up_your_namespaces
  - standard: install_skupper_in_your_namespaces
  - standard: check_the_status_of_your_namespaces
  - standard: link_your_namespaces
  <your-custom-steps>
  - standard: test_the_application
  - standard: accessing_the_web_console
  - standard: cleaning_up
~~~

Note that the `link_your_namespaces` and `test_the_application` steps
are less generic than the other steps, so check that the text and
commands they produce are doing what you need.  If not, you'll need to
provide a custom step.

The step commands are separated into named groups corresponding to the
sites.  Each named group contains a list of command entries.  Each
command entry has a `run` field containing a shell command and other
fields for awaiting completion or providing sample output.

A **command**:

~~~ yaml
- run:              # A shell command (required)
  apply:            # Use this command only for "readme" or "test" (optional, default is both)
  output:           # Sample output to include in the README (optional)
~~~

Only the `run` and `output` fields are used in the README content.
The `output` field is used as sample output only, not for any kind of
testing.

The `apply` field is useful when you want the readme instructions to
be different from the test procedure, or you simply want to omit
something.

There is also a special `await` command you can use to pause for a
condition you require before going to the next step.  It is used only
for testing and does not impact the README.

~~~ yaml
- await:            # A resource or list of resources for which to await readiness (optional)
~~~

Example commands:

~~~ yaml
commands:
  east:
    - run: kubectl expose deployment/backend --port 8080 --type LoadBalancer
      output: |
        service/frontend exposed
  west:
    - await: service/backend
    - run: kubectl get service/backend
      output: |
        NAME          TYPE           CLUSTER-IP       EXTERNAL-IP      PORT(S)         AGE
        backend       ClusterIP      10.102.112.121   <none>           8080/TCP        30s
~~~

## Demo mode

Skewer has a mode where it executes all the steps, but before cleaning
up and exiting, it pauses so you can inspect things.

It is enabled by setting the environment variable `SKEWER_DEMO` to any
value when you call `./plano run` or one of its variants.  You can
also use `./plano demo`, which sets the variable for you.

Commit message:

Add instructions to install pyyaml

README.md, after:

# Skewer

[![main](https://github.com/skupperproject/skewer/actions/workflows/main.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/skupperproject/skewer/actions/workflows/main.yaml)

A library for documenting and testing Skupper examples

A `skewer.yaml` file describes the steps and commands to achieve an
objective using Skupper.  Skewer takes the `skewer.yaml` file as input
and produces two outputs: a `README.md` file and a test routine.

## An example example

[Example `skewer.yaml` file](test-example/skewer.yaml)

[Example `README.md` output](test-example/README.md)

## Setting up Skewer for your own example

**Note:** This is how you set things up from scratch.  You can also
use the [Skupper example template][template] as a starting point.

[template]: https://github.com/skupperproject/skupper-example-template

Make sure you have git-subrepo installed:

    dnf install git-subrepo

Add the Skewer code as a subrepo in your example project:

    cd project-dir/
    git subrepo clone https://github.com/skupperproject/skewer subrepos/skewer

Symlink the Skewer library into your `python` directory:

    mkdir -p python
    ln -s ../subrepos/skewer/python/skewer python/skewer

Symlink the `plano` command into the root of your project.  Symlink
the standard `config/.planofile` as `.planofile` in the root as well:

    ln -s subrepos/skewer/plano
    ln -s subrepos/skewer/config/.planofile

<!-- This sucks.  GitHub Actions doesn't support workflow files as symlinks. -->

<!-- Symlink the standard GitHub Actions workflow file: -->

<!--     mkdir -p .github/workflows -->
<!--     ln -s ../../subrepos/skewer/config/.github/workflows/main.yaml .github/workflows/main.yaml -->

<!-- So I have a convenience for copying the latest version into place. -->

To use the `./plano` command, you must have the Python `pyyaml`
package installed.  Use `pip` (or `pip3` on some systems) to install
it:

    pip install pyyaml

Use the `plano update-workflow` command to copy the latest GitHub
Actions workflow file into your project:

    ./plano update-workflow

Use your editor to create a `skewer.yaml` file in the root of your
project:

    emacs skewer.yaml

Run the `./plano` command to see the available commands:

~~~ console
$ ./plano
usage: plano [--verbose] [--quiet] [--debug] [-h] [-f FILE] {generate,render,run,run-external,demo,test,update-workflow} ...

Run commands defined as Python functions

options:
  --verbose             Print detailed logging to the console
  --quiet               Print no logging to the console
  --debug               Print debugging output to the console
  -h, --help            Show this help message and exit
  -f FILE, --file FILE  Load commands from FILE (default 'Planofile' or '.planofile')

commands:
  {generate,render,run,run-external,demo,test,update-workflow}
    generate            Generate README.md from the data in skewer.yaml
    render              Render README.html from the data in skewer.yaml
    run                 Run the example steps using Minikube
    run-external        Run the example steps against external clusters
    demo                Run the example steps and pause before cleaning up
    test                Test README generation and run the steps on Minikube
    update-workflow     Update the GitHub Actions workflow file
~~~

## Updating a Skewer subrepo inside your example project

Use `git subrepo pull`:

    git subrepo pull --force subrepos/skewer

Some older versions of git-subrepo won't complete a force pull.  If
that happens, you can simply blow away your changes and get the latest
Skewer, using these commands:

    git subrepo clean subrepos/skewer
    git rm -rf subrepos/skewer/
    git commit -am "Temporarily remove the previous version of Skewer"
    git subrepo clone https://github.com/skupperproject/skewer subrepos/skewer

## Skewer YAML

The top level:

~~~ yaml
title:              # Your example's title (required)
subtitle:           # Your chosen subtitle (required)
github_actions_url: # The URL of your workflow (optional)
overview:           # Text introducing your example (optional)
prerequisites:      # Text describing prerequisites (optional, has default text)
sites:              # A map of named sites (see below)
steps:              # A list of steps (see below)
summary:            # Text to summarize what the user did (optional)
next_steps:         # Text linking to more examples (optional, has default text)
~~~

A **site**:

~~~ yaml
<site-name>:
  kubeconfig: <kubeconfig-file>  # (required)
  namespace: <namespace-name>    # (required)
~~~

A tilde (~) in the kubeconfig file path is replaced with a temporary
working directory during testing.

Example sites:

~~~ yaml
sites:
  east:
    kubeconfig: ~/.kube/config-east
    namespace: east
  west:
    kubeconfig: ~/.kube/config-west
    namespace: west
~~~

A **step**:

~~~ yaml
- title:            # The step title (required)
  preamble:         # Text before the commands (optional)
  commands:         # Named groups of commands.  See below.
  postamble:        # Text after the commands (optional)
~~~

An example step:

~~~ yaml
steps:
  - title: Expose the frontend service
    preamble: |
      We have established connectivity between the two namespaces and
      made the backend in `east` available to the frontend in `west`.
      Before we can test the application, we need external access to
      the frontend.

      Use `kubectl expose` with `--type LoadBalancer` to open network
      access to the frontend service.  Use `kubectl get services` to
      check for the service and its external IP address.
    commands:
      east: <list-of-commands>
      west: <list-of-commands>
~~~

Or you can use a named step from the library of standard steps:

~~~ yaml
- standard: configure_separate_console_sessions
~~~

The standard steps are defined in
[python/skewer.yaml](python/skewer.yaml).

You can override the `title`, `preamble`, `commands`, or `postamble`
field of a standard step by adding the field in addition to
`standard`:

~~~ yaml
- standard: cleaning_up
  commands:
    east:
     - run: skupper delete
     - run: kubectl delete deployment/database
    west:
     - run: skupper delete
~~~

The initial steps are usually standard ones.  There are also some
standard steps at the end.  You may be able to use something like
this:

~~~ yaml
steps:
  - standard: configure_separate_console_sessions
  - standard: access_your_clusters
  - standard: set_up_your_namespaces
  - standard: install_skupper_in_your_namespaces
  - standard: check_the_status_of_your_namespaces
  - standard: link_your_namespaces
  <your-custom-steps>
  - standard: test_the_application
  - standard: accessing_the_web_console
  - standard: cleaning_up
~~~

Note that the `link_your_namespaces` and `test_the_application` steps
are less generic than the other steps, so check that the text and
commands they produce are doing what you need.  If not, you'll need to
provide a custom step.

The step commands are separated into named groups corresponding to the
sites.  Each named group contains a list of command entries.  Each
command entry has a `run` field containing a shell command and other
fields for awaiting completion or providing sample output.

A **command**:

~~~ yaml
- run:              # A shell command (required)
  apply:            # Use this command only for "readme" or "test" (optional, default is both)
  output:           # Sample output to include in the README (optional)
~~~

Only the `run` and `output` fields are used in the README content.
The `output` field is used as sample output only, not for any kind of
testing.

The `apply` field is useful when you want the readme instructions to
be different from the test procedure, or you simply want to omit
something.

There is also a special `await` command you can use to pause for a
condition you require before going to the next step.  It is used only
for testing and does not impact the README.

~~~ yaml
- await:            # A resource or list of resources for which to await readiness (optional)
~~~

Example commands:

~~~ yaml
commands:
  east:
    - run: kubectl expose deployment/backend --port 8080 --type LoadBalancer
      output: |
        service/frontend exposed
  west:
    - await: service/backend
    - run: kubectl get service/backend
      output: |
        NAME          TYPE           CLUSTER-IP       EXTERNAL-IP      PORT(S)         AGE
        backend       ClusterIP      10.102.112.121   <none>           8080/TCP        30s
~~~

## Demo mode

Skewer has a mode where it executes all the steps, but before cleaning
up and exiting, it pauses so you can inspect things.

It is enabled by setting the environment variable `SKEWER_DEMO` to any
value when you call `./plano run` or one of its variants.  You can
also use `./plano demo`, which sets the variable for you.
